README.md, before:

# Heart Failure Classification

## About

In this analysis, we explored various classification models with the intent of predicting whether a patient is at risk of heart failure based on clinical data and lifestyle factors of individuals. After evaluating multiple models through cross-validation, we selected Logistic Regression as our final model due to its overall superior performance across classification metrics. The model demonstrated promising results on the unseen test set, with an accuracy of 86% and F1-scores of 0.88 for the positive class (at risk) and 0.84 for the negative class (not at risk). From the 276 observations in the test set, the model correctly identified 144 cases at risk and 97 not at risk, reporting 23 false positives and 12 false negatives (cases predicted as not at risk when there is risk). Although the scores are encouraging for a first iteration, there is room for improvement to optimize the hyperparameters and the model's threshold settings to minimize false negative cases, which are critical in medical applications. Overall, this model shows potential to support clinical professionals in the assessment of patients during screening. 

The [dataset](https://epl.di.uminho.pt/~jcr/AULAS/ATP2021/datasets/heart.csv) used in this project is pulled from a repository of the [University of Minho,  Portugal](https://www.uminho.pt/EN/student-life/campi/Pages/Description.aspx). The dataset was created by Federico Soriano Palacios (2021), it integrates five different heart-related datasets combined over 11 common features that can be used to predict a possible heart disease. The five data sets are part of the [“Heart Disease” dataset](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/45/heart+disease) (Janosi _et al._, 1989) that can be found in the UCI Machine Learning Repository  that is originally sourced from the Hungarian Institute of Cardiology, the University Hospital of Zurich, the University Hospital of Basel, the V.A. Medical Center of Long Beach and Cleveland Clinic Foundation. Each row of the dataset contains 11 attributes that describe the patient’s age, sex, chest pain type, resting blood pressure, serum cholesterol, fasting blood sugar, resting ECG result, maximum heart rate achieved, exercise induced angina, ST depression induced by exercise relative to rest, slope of the peak exercise ST segment, and the presence or absence of heart disease. 

## Report

The final report can be found here [report](reports/heart_disease_analysis.pdf)

## Dependencies

- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
- [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)
- [VS Code Jupyter Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-toolsai.jupyter)
- [Conda](https://anaconda.org/channels/anaconda/packages/conda/overview)

_All library dependencies are specified in `environment.yml` for conda or `conda-lock.yml` for reproducible builds._

## Usage 

#### Clone repository

```
git clone https://github.com/EricYangg/Heart-Failure-Classification.git
cd Heart-Failure-Classification
```

#### Environment Setup

To reproduce the analysis you can use one of the three following options:

<details>
<summary><strong>Option 1: Use conda-lock</strong></summary>

1. Install the conda lock from the root of this repository:

``` bash
conda-lock install --name heart-failure-classification conda-lock.yml
```

2. Switch to the project's environment by running the following line from the terminal:

``` bash
conda activate heart-failure-classification
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>Option 2: Use environment.yml</strong></summary>

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda heart-failure-classification
```

</details>


<details>
<summary><strong>Option 3: Use docker</strong></summary>

1. [Install](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) and launch Docker on your computer.
2. Navigate to the root of this project on your computer using the command line and enter the following command to reset the project to a clean state (i.e., remove all files generated by previous runs of the analysis):

```
docker-compose up
```

3. In the terminal, look for a URL that starts with `http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab?token=`
(for an example, see the highlighted text in the terminal below). 
Copy and paste that URL into your browser to open Jupyter Notebooks.

<img src="img/jupyter-container-web-app-launch-url.jpeg" width=400>

</details>


#### Running the analysis

1. To run the analysis, open a terminal and run the following commands:

```
python scripts/download_data.py \
--url="https://epl.di.uminho.pt/~jcr/AULAS/ATP2021/datasets/heart.csv" \
--write_to=data/raw

python scripts/validate_n_split.py \
--logs-to=logs \
--raw-data=data/raw/heart.csv \
--data-to=data/validated \
--seed=123

python scripts/eda_validate.py \
--training-data=data/validated/heart_train.csv \
--test-data=data/validated/heart_test.csv \
--plot-to=results/figures \
--data-to=data/validated

python scripts/preprocessor.py \
--training-data=data/validated/heart_train.csv \
--preprocessor-to=results/models \
--seed=123

python scripts/fit_heart_disease_model.py \
--x-train-data=data/validated/X_train.csv \
--y-train-data=data/validated/y_train.csv \
--x-test-data=data/validated/X_test.csv \
--y-test-data=data/validated/y_test.csv \
--preprocessor=results/models/heart_preprocessor.pickle \
--pipeline-to=results/models \
--results-to=results/tables \
--figures-to=results/figures \
--seed=123 \
--cv-folds=5

quarto render reports/heart_disease_analysis.qmd --to html
quarto render reports/heart_disease_analysis.qmd --to pdf
```

#### Clean up

1. To shut down the container and clean up the resources, type `Ctrl` + `C` in the terminal where you launched the container, and then type `docker compose rm`

## Contributors

#### Omar Ramos

- **Affiliation**: University of British Columbia
- **Email**: <omar.ramos19@gmail.com>
- **GitHub**: [@mayitoxix](https://github.com/mayitoxix)

#### Mara Sánchez

- **Affiliation**: University of British Columbia
- **Email**: <marasanchezrom@gmail.com>
- **GitHub**: [@mara-sanchez1](https://github.com/mara-sanchez1)

#### Eric Yang

- **Affiliation**: University of British Columbia
- **Email**: <eric99yang@gmail.com>
- **GitHub**: [@EricYangg](https://github.com/EricYangg)

## Acknowledgements

The reproducible data science workflow implemented in this project was greatly inspired by Dr. Tiffany Timbers's [DSCI 522 course](https://ubc-mds.github.io/course-descriptions/DSCI_522_dsci-workflows/).


## License

The Heart Failure Classification project are licensed under the [Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/). Check out the [license file](LICENSE.md) for more information. If re-using/re-mixing please provide attribution and link to this webpage.
The software code contained within this repository is licensed under the MIT license. Check out the [license file](LICENSE.md) for more information.


## References

Dua, Dheeru, and Casey Graff. 2017. “UCI Machine Learning Repository.” University of California, Irvine, School of Information; Computer Sciences. <http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml>.

Janosi, A., Steinbrunn, W., Pfisterer, M., & Detrano, R. (1989). Heart Disease [Dataset]. UCI Machine Learning Repository. <https://doi.org/10.24432/C52P4X>.

Savarese, G., Lund, L. H., & Becher, P. M. (2023). Global burden of heart failure: A comprehensive and updated review of epidemiology. Cardiovascular Research, 118(17), 3272–3287. <https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvac013https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35150240/>

Barnett, M. P., Koppes, L. L. J., & … [et al.]. (2020). Cardiovascular risk factors: It’s time to focus on variability! Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 7, Article 80. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2020.00080(PMC published version) https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7379092/>

Commit message:

Update the execution section with latest make commands

README.md, after:

# Heart Failure Classification

## About

In this analysis, we explored various classification models with the intent of predicting whether a patient is at risk of heart failure based on clinical data and lifestyle factors of individuals. After evaluating multiple models through cross-validation, we selected Logistic Regression as our final model due to its overall superior performance across classification metrics. The model demonstrated promising results on the unseen test set, with an accuracy of 86% and F1-scores of 0.88 for the positive class (at risk) and 0.84 for the negative class (not at risk). From the 276 observations in the test set, the model correctly identified 144 cases at risk and 97 not at risk, reporting 23 false positives and 12 false negatives (cases predicted as not at risk when there is risk). Although the scores are encouraging for a first iteration, there is room for improvement to optimize the hyperparameters and the model's threshold settings to minimize false negative cases, which are critical in medical applications. Overall, this model shows potential to support clinical professionals in the assessment of patients during screening. 

The [dataset](https://epl.di.uminho.pt/~jcr/AULAS/ATP2021/datasets/heart.csv) used in this project is pulled from a repository of the [University of Minho,  Portugal](https://www.uminho.pt/EN/student-life/campi/Pages/Description.aspx). The dataset was created by Federico Soriano Palacios (2021), it integrates five different heart-related datasets combined over 11 common features that can be used to predict a possible heart disease. The five data sets are part of the [“Heart Disease” dataset](https://archive.ics.uci.edu/dataset/45/heart+disease) (Janosi _et al._, 1989) that can be found in the UCI Machine Learning Repository  that is originally sourced from the Hungarian Institute of Cardiology, the University Hospital of Zurich, the University Hospital of Basel, the V.A. Medical Center of Long Beach and Cleveland Clinic Foundation. Each row of the dataset contains 11 attributes that describe the patient’s age, sex, chest pain type, resting blood pressure, serum cholesterol, fasting blood sugar, resting ECG result, maximum heart rate achieved, exercise induced angina, ST depression induced by exercise relative to rest, slope of the peak exercise ST segment, and the presence or absence of heart disease. 

## Report

The final report can be found here [report](reports/heart_disease_analysis.pdf)

## Dependencies

- [Docker](https://www.docker.com/)
- [VS Code](https://code.visualstudio.com/download)
- [VS Code Jupyter Extension](https://marketplace.visualstudio.com/items?itemName=ms-toolsai.jupyter)
- [Conda](https://anaconda.org/channels/anaconda/packages/conda/overview)

_All library dependencies are specified in `environment.yml` for conda or `conda-lock.yml` for reproducible builds._

## Usage 

#### Clone repository

```
git clone https://github.com/EricYangg/Heart-Failure-Classification.git
cd Heart-Failure-Classification
```

#### Environment Setup

To reproduce the analysis you can use one of the three following options:

<details>
<summary><strong>Option 1: Use conda-lock</strong></summary>

1. Install the conda lock from the root of this repository:

``` bash
conda-lock install --name heart-failure-classification conda-lock.yml
```

2. Switch to the project's environment by running the following line from the terminal:

``` bash
conda activate heart-failure-classification
```

</details>

<details>
<summary><strong>Option 2: Use environment.yml</strong></summary>

```bash
conda env create -f environment.yml
conda heart-failure-classification
```

</details>


<details>
<summary><strong>Option 3: Use docker</strong></summary>

1. [Install](https://www.docker.com/get-started/) and launch Docker on your computer.
2. Run the Docker container: Navigate to the root of this project on your computer using the command line and enter the following command to reset the project to a clean state (i.e., remove all files generated by previous runs of the analysis):

```
docker-compose up
```

3. Access Jupyter Lab: In the terminal, look for a URL that starts with `http://127.0.0.1:8888/lab?token=`
(for an example, see the highlighted text in the terminal below). 
Copy and paste that URL into your browser to open Jupyter Notebooks.

<img src="img/jupyter-container-web-app-launch-url.jpeg" width=400>

</details>


#### Running the analysis

1. Clean the project: Open a terminal, navigate to the root of this project, and run:

```
make clean
```

This removes any previously generated files to start with a clean environment.


2. Run the analysis:

```
make all
```

This builds the project and run the entire analysis workflow.

#### Clean up

1. To shut down the container and clean up the resources, press `Ctrl` + `C` in the terminal where the container is running, and then run `docker compose rm`

## Contributors

#### Omar Ramos

- **Affiliation**: University of British Columbia
- **Email**: <omar.ramos19@gmail.com>
- **GitHub**: [@mayitoxix](https://github.com/mayitoxix)

#### Mara Sánchez

- **Affiliation**: University of British Columbia
- **Email**: <marasanchezrom@gmail.com>
- **GitHub**: [@mara-sanchez1](https://github.com/mara-sanchez1)

#### Eric Yang

- **Affiliation**: University of British Columbia
- **Email**: <eric99yang@gmail.com>
- **GitHub**: [@EricYangg](https://github.com/EricYangg)

## Acknowledgements

The reproducible data science workflow implemented in this project was greatly inspired by Dr. Tiffany Timbers's [DSCI 522 course](https://ubc-mds.github.io/course-descriptions/DSCI_522_dsci-workflows/).


## License

The Heart Failure Classification project are licensed under the [Attribution-NonCommercial-ShareAlike 4.0 International (CC BY-NC-SA 4.0) License](https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-sa/4.0/). Check out the [license file](LICENSE.md) for more information. If re-using/re-mixing please provide attribution and link to this webpage.
The software code contained within this repository is licensed under the MIT license. Check out the [license file](LICENSE.md) for more information.


## References

Dua, Dheeru, and Casey Graff. 2017. “UCI Machine Learning Repository.” University of California, Irvine, School of Information; Computer Sciences. <http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml>.

Janosi, A., Steinbrunn, W., Pfisterer, M., & Detrano, R. (1989). Heart Disease [Dataset]. UCI Machine Learning Repository. <https://doi.org/10.24432/C52P4X>.

Savarese, G., Lund, L. H., & Becher, P. M. (2023). Global burden of heart failure: A comprehensive and updated review of epidemiology. Cardiovascular Research, 118(17), 3272–3287. <https://doi.org/10.1093/cvr/cvac013https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35150240/>

Barnett, M. P., Koppes, L. L. J., & … [et al.]. (2020). Cardiovascular risk factors: It’s time to focus on variability! Frontiers in Cardiovascular Medicine, 7, Article 80. <https://doi.org/10.3389/fcvm.2020.00080(PMC published version) https://pmc.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/articles/PMC7379092/>
